l-Text Archive Search in PMC Journal List User Guide PERMALINK Copy As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice J Cell Mol Med. 2026 Apr 25;30(8):e71159. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.71159 Advances in CRISPR Base Editing: From Molecular Evolution to Therapeutic Applications in Genomic Medicine Melike Aliciaslan Melike Aliciaslan 1 Department of Gene and Cell Therapy, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey Find articles by Melike Aliciaslan 1, Ezgi Erbasan Ezgi Erbasan 1 Department of Gene and Cell Therapy, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey Find articles by Ezgi Erbasan 1,  [...] uent cellular repair (NHEJ or HDR) leads to gene editing outcomes. (D) Base Editors (BEs): Derived from the CRISPR system, Base Editors enable precise single‐base changes without inducing DSBs [5]. They consist of a catalytically impaired Cas protein (either a nickase, nCas9, which cuts only one strand, or a deactivated Cas9, dCas9, which doesn't cut at all) fused to a DNA deaminase enzyme (e.g., cytidine deaminase for C•G to T•A edits or adenine deaminase for A•T to G•C edits). Guided by an sgRNA, the editor binds to the target DNA, and the deaminase directly converts a target base within a specific editing window. A nick on the non‐edited strand often enhances the efficiency of incorporating the edit during DNA repair. (E) Prime Editors (PEs): A versatile ‘search‐and‐replace’ genome editing tech [...] DR efficiency), led researchers to invent new, more accurate gene editing tools. Base editing represents a significant leap forward, enabling targeted single‐nucleotide conversions directly on the DNA without DSBs or donor templates. The core technology involves fusing catalytically dead or nickase Cas proteins to DNA deaminase enzymes. Cytosine base editors (CBEs) convert C•G to T•A pairs, while adenine base editors (ABEs) change A•T to G•C. These editors exploit the deaminase function within the R‐loop structure formed by Cas binding and co‐opt endogenous DNA repair mechanisms for precision. While offering improved efficiency and editing precision, base editing faces persistent challenges, such as off‐target effects, bystander edits, delivery and ethical concerns. Continuous engineering efforts